# Mathematical Foundation

>Mathematics and music, the most sharply contrasted fields or scientific activity, are yet so related as to reveal the secret connection binding together all the activities of our mind. -- Hermann von Helmholtz

## What is Mathematics?

Mathematicians to this day argue about the fundamental nature of math.
Do we humans invent it, or do we discover it?
Platonists and realists say that numbers are real, mind-independent things, implying that they were *discovered*.
Conceptualists say that numbers exist but are just mind-dependent ideas; nominalists say that numbers do not exist.
The latter two positions would imply that numbers are *invented*.

The difficulty in grasping that question is that we are thrown into math, as *Heidegger* would say.
Teachers tell us what it is and how it works.
We use it before we reflect on it or understand it; it is *ready to hand*.
Math, similar to language, is like a virus or parasite that circulates through the human mind and reproduces itself like an *autopoietic system*.
It is closed and gets irritated by new observations such that it extends or adapts itself (through us).

Because it happens within us, animals, and even plants -- yes, there is a plant that can count -- it is part of whatever there is.
But I don't think we need some platonic space of perfect ideas that are hidden somewhere and forever.
Such meta concepts are shortcuts for something we do not understand yet.
The platonic worldview is mystical and religious.
It introduces something extra, something godly that we do not need.
And it devalues life as something to overcome instead of embrace.
Call me impulsive, but I despise the platonic worldview more and more.

Only because we have never experienced a perfect circle does not mean we can not imagine one.
I have never experienced a pink elephant, but I can perfectly picture one.
Does this mean there has to be another perfect world where the idea of a pink elephant lives?
The world of ideas cripples the fascination with the infinite complexity of what there is.

We have never experienced a perfect circle.
But we found a model called circle that models circle-like objects that we perceived.

$$K = \{(\cos(\phi), \sin(\phi)) : \phi \in [0;2\pi]\}$$

However, this perception is most undoubtedly incorrect and definitively subjective.
The abstraction is an objectified version we often silently agree on because our experiences endorse it.
Platon believed that these abstractions are more accurate than what we perceive, i.e., through the perception of a chair shines the idea of it.
And the idea is perfect.
I think it is the other way around, and instead of perfect and imperfect, I use the terms *concrete* and *abstract*.
The chair is *concrete*, but our perception of it has nothing to do with it except it enables us to deal with it.
Our perception is the first *abstraction*.
The *second-order abstraction* of it, e.g., using the word *chair*, is a silent agreement of a set of perceptions we call *chair*.
For the number 1, this is similar.

Therefore, mathematics is a product of our perception.
And suppose we assume that our perception is realized by reality (our biochemical body).
In that case, mathematics is real, invented (similar to language), and discovered (it helps us with reality) but might have nothing to do with what we perceive as our reality.

## Why do we need Math?

Do we need the math of signal processing to design and make a sound?
Well, I suppose we don't.
As musicians, we are perfectly able to create great compositions without knowing what *complex numbers* or the *Fourier transformation* is.
We do not really care about sample rates or the *Nyquist sample theorem*.
And we don't really have to because there are many tools that help in our creative process while hiding all the complicated mathematical backgrounds.

However, tools can be a burden.
Recently I heard about a new artificial intelligence that can generate beautiful images by using a textual description.
The user types in her imagination of a landscape, and the artificial intelligence generates different versions of it.
One can even specify certain artists to achieve a particular style.
After the images are rendered, the user selects her favorites and continues.
It is fascinating, but at the same time, I wonder if this process is satisfactory for the user.
Is she really producing art?
I would argue that the result belongs not only to her but to the artificial intelligence and its developers.
The experience of generating artificial images is shallow because the effort, the struggle, and the social and cultural context is missing.

Whenever we use tools that hide specific details, we limit ourselves to the interface of those tools.
Furthermore, our artwork will be a product of those tools.
The sound generated by playing the piano is, in part, the product of the piano.
But the artist has mastered it; he has a certain degree of control over the instrument.
In the example above, the artist has very little control; she is highly dependent on the suggestions of the machine.
She is guiding the machine but can no longer take over control.

That is why I like [SuperCollider](https://supercollider.github.io/): it offers a lot of control; it does not hide too much of the concrete.
Of course, there is always a tradeoff between the abstract and the concrete.
We are never entirely concrete because some abstraction will always separate us from the real thing: the digital machine.

The question is: how close do we want to get? How much control do we want to have? How much effort do we want to put in?
I like to think that the artwork can not be separated from the process that created it.
It should tell a story; it should be imbued with emotions, passion, and struggle.

The mathematical foundation of signal processing can help us to get closer to the concrete and to get even more control over the creative process.
It can help us not only to understand but experience the process.